those who stand on tiptoes do not stand
firmly those who rush ahead don't get
very far those who try to outshine
others dim their own light loud sir how
can we improve when we stop trying to
improve many people wasted their efforts
trying to better their lives with
questionable results they gain knowledge
and chase external things while
exhausting their bodies and burdening
their minds only to end up in discontent
the Taoist observed that humans tend to
act in ways that are counterproductive
and in their attempts to alter the
natural way they only make things worse
all these strivings rules ethics values
surely are invented to benefit humanity
but according to the ancient Taoist
sages we should get rid of them all why
because all these man-made ideas only
remove us further from the natural flow
of life trying to alter what nature has
intended it's like swimming against the
stream it's exhausting and gets us
nowhere this video is about not trying
to change the world to gain the world
[Music]
behind the ever-changing universe lies a
mysterious and undefinable force that
the Daoists call dow for the lack of a
better word the dow is all encompassing
and it's beyond everything that our
senses can perceive still we can know
and feel the dow even though we cannot
comprehend it this symbolizes the tragic
attempts by humans to conceptualize
things that are beyond their
understanding they use names categories
they select and discern but fail to
grasp what the universe is truly like so
they create a deception an artifice that
makes life understandable for humans but
by trying to comprehend they lose the
Dow 5 colors
blind at the eye 5 notes defin the air 5
flavors make the palate go still wrote
Lao Tzu in his work the daodejing so by
arranging colors notes and flavors we
might enhance our understanding but we
also limit it and there's so much more
outside of these fixed concepts
the same goes for the human tendency to
make rock-solid rules for everything to
get a sense of control again we limit
ourselves by doing so because the world
is ever changing and what works today
may not work tomorrow
also from a sense of solidarity
injustice people create immense bodies
of ethics moral codes and rituals that
form an artificial way of life even
though the intentions are good they try
to make things work while building their
own prisons now let's talk about the
word trying I think most of us are
familiar with the idea that we should
simply act and not try this idea is
closely related to the flow state in a
flow state one becomes the act like a
dancer who becomes the dance or the poet
who becomes the poem this is a way a
concept that can be literally translated
as non doing or doing nothing in the
context of the flow state Wu Wei
translates best as effortless action
because we act in a smooth and painless
manner in the context of this video
however
translating wuwei as non doing or doing
nothing fits best literally doing
nothing is often seen as unproductive
and as a useless way of being in which
there's no progression but according to
the Daoists nothing is further from the
truth when we keep in mind that the
universe is in flux and in a state of
entropy will realize that there's always
progression in a natural flow of life so
instead of using force and exhausting
ourselves which is the favorite method
of today's culture we could travel
through life much more easily by using
intelligence because isn't it so that so
many times
problems seem to solve themselves and
that by taking action we often make
things worse when we waste our time
trying to improve things we distance
ourselves from the natural course we
repeatedly act in ways that are
according to the Daoists unnatural and
waste our bodies and minds doing so so
why do we do this well it has a lot to
do with how we attribute value to
certain things for example when we are
averse to poverty but desire money and
fame and when we are averse to being
lonely but desire to be part of
something so we try to eradicate a
former and increase the letter well the
letter cannot exist without the former
also we think that it's necessary to
conform and alter nature based on belief
systems we try to better the world while
the results of our interventions are
kind of questionable
now how can we bring these ancient
theories into the modern world according
to Taoist thinking in what ways do we
modern humans try while our efforts only
leave us with peanuts in the end let's
explore some examples of how we try
using the ancient Taoist scriptures the
daodejing
and the Zhuangzi the first one is trying
to improve the world Alan Watts who was
a fervent scholar of Taoism once pointed
out that the goody-goodies of society
are the biggest troublemakers there must
save the world attitude often disrupts
the natural course simply because they
seek to enforce man-made ideas of what's
good and evil an example is communism
which originally sprouted from a desire
to change humanity for the better based
on equality and honest distribution of
goods however apart from the discussion
if this approach is natural or not the
ways in which the Communists spread
their ideology were absolutely brutal in
the zhuangzi we find a story about a man
named yen we who asked Confucius for
permission to travel to the country of a
way after he heard that it's ruled by an
incompetent ruler yen we wanted to use
everything he learned about governance
to improve the country of way Confucius
however discouraged him to do so not
only because ways highly disagreeable
leader probably wouldn't listen but also
because people in general don't like
outsiders coming in telling what's
better for them from a place of moral
supremacy as Confucius stated and a
quote if you do not understand man's
minds but instead appear before a tyrant
and force him to listen to sermons on
benevolence and righteousness measures
and standards this is simply using other
man's bad points to parade your own
excellence and quote we could ask
ourselves in what ways using other
people's faults to create a nice role
for ourselves
genuine virtue we won't improve a
situation by one-sidedly demonizing
groups while placing ourselves on a
moral high ground this only creates more
division more
tension and will unlikely change things
for the better in a sustainable manner
as loud sir puts it in the daodejing and
i quote do you want to rule the world
and control it i don't think it can ever
be done the world is a sacred vessel and
it cannot be controlled you will only
make it worse if you try it may slip
through your fingers and disappear and
quote now the second one is trying to be
happy no matter if it's the pursuit of
money status fame power or knowledge
these ongoing efforts to be happy are
the reason why we aren't we think that
we're happy when we've got a million
dollars in the bank or when we finally
published that book or when our YouTube
channels have 100k subscribers but this
is hardly the case sure we enjoy some
momentary pleasure but that's not
happiness according to the Daoists
moreover by this pursuit we exhaust our
bodies and minds while tragically never
achieving what we are looking for I
quote this is what the world honors
wealth eminence long life a good name
this is what the world finds happiness
in a life of ease rich food fine clothes
beautiful sights sweet sounds this is
what it looks down on poverty meanness
early death a bad name this is what it
finds bitter a life that knows no rest a
mouth that gets no rich food no fine
clothes for the body no beautiful sight
for the eye no sweet sounds for the air
people who can't get these things fret a
great deal and are afraid this is a
stupid way to treat a body people who
are rich wear themselves out rushing
around on business piling up more wealth
than they could ever use this is a
superficial way to treat the body end
quote
so when chasing happiness is a blind
alley what should we do instead
well the Taoist gave us some suggestions
but before we go into them let's look at
a third one trying to be something else
the shuang's tells us a story about
animals in the wind
that Envy each other for their inborn
characteristics the centipede envies the
snake for the fact that it can move with
lags but the snake and vist the wind for
its ability to travel great distances
without having a body at all however the
wind argues that it takes just a finger
or foot to inner it all in all nature
has created everything with its own
attributes nothing is better than the
other only judgment makes it so thus we
feel the need to change who we are just
to fit an ideal white skins people try
to beat and while East Asians try to
look more European brunettes try to be
blonde and blondes try to be brunette
also we try to change ourselves because
we want to conform to a man-made
standard to fit in simply because we're
seen as defects when we don't so a six
finger is cut off just to comply with
the five finger standard why can't we
just be who we are the way nature
intended us to be that would be so much
easier everyone and everything has its
place in the whole and by trying to
alter this we bring the world in this
balance I quote when people see things
as beautiful ugliness is created when
people see things as good evil is
created being and non-being produce each
other difficult and easy complement each
other
long and short define each other high
and low oppose each other foreign AFT
follow each other and quote so how can
we put these ideas into practice the
taoist suggests several things first of
all the zhang xue'er points to the
benefits of taking the middle path this
means that we shouldn't stretch
ourselves beyond our means but stay
centered so we conserve our health and
stay close to our own nature I quote
follow the middle go by what is constant
and you can stay in one piece keep
yourself alive
look after your parents and live out
your years and quote the Dow is constant
and the one who seeks the dow unlearn
something new every day
according to Lao Tzu so instead of
limiting ourselves to a belief system we
let go keep an open mind
and give the universe room to show
itself as it is trying to change nature
is a futile pursuit as is trying to blur
our vision of nature by man-made
construct instead of adding to knowledge
we let go of knowledge until we reach a
point of inner stillness only then we're
opening ourselves up to the DAO or what
we from atheistic point of view could
call God in this state of emptiness we
feel content and contentment is true
happiness the Daoists call this process
the fasting of the heart by unlearning
something every day the taoist arrives
at non action it's the art of not trying
well nothing will be left undone thank
you for watching
[Music]
you